JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: As
President Trump
tries to settle back in after
his trip to
the Middle East and Europe, the
White House
faces new and persistent
questions over the
Russia investigations.
Then, I sit down with the former
Director
of National Intelligence James
Clapper to
talk North Korea, the terrorist
threat, and
those recent revelations linking
Jared Kushner
to Russia.
JAMES CLAPPER, Former U.S.
National Intelligence
Director: If it's true that the
objective
here was to use Russian secure
communications
as the mode of this dialogue or
this communication,
that is, I will say, curious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And bringing
poetry to Chicago's
schools, how the nation's first
Mexican-American
poet laureate is urging students
to find their
voice through verse.
JUAN FELIPE HERRERA, U.S. Poet
Laureate: The
poetry is there, but it's there
rumbling in
the heart and in the blood and
what they see,
you know, what they see day to
day.
And we want to bring all that
out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: From the outside,
it appears
the Trump White House has spent
this day fending
off questions about ties to
Russia, relations
with Germany, and staff
shakeups, all of this
as the president tries to move
ahead amid
the turmoil.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: It was the first
on-camera White
House briefing in more than two
weeks, but
topic A was still the Russian
connection.
Press Secretary Sean Spicer
brushed aside
reports that presidential
son-in-law Jared
Kushner met the Russian
ambassador in December,
seeking to set up a direct line
to Russian
President Vladimir Putin outside
normal diplomatic
channels.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
I think that assumes a lot, and
I would just
say that Mr. Kushner's attorney
has said that
Mr. Kushner has volunteered to
share with
Congress what he knows about
these meetings
and he will do the same if he's
contacted
or connected with any other
inquiry.
JOHN YANG: The New York Times
reported investigators
are also looking into a meeting
Kushner held
with the head of a state-owned
Russian bank
that is under U.S. sanctions.
And CNN reported that, during
the presidential
campaign, U.S. intelligence
intercepted Russian
officials, saying they had
potentially derogatory
financial information about Mr.
Trump and
some top aides.
This morning, the president
tweeted: "Russian
officials must be laughing at
the U.S. and
how a lame excuse for why the
Dems lost the
election has taken over the fake
news."
Now back home, after his first
overseas trip,
Mr. Trump traded tough words
today with German
Chancellor Angela Merkel.
After the two met at European
summits, the
German leader said, "We in
Europe have to
take our fate into our own
hands."
In turn, the president tweeted:
"We have a
massive trade deficit with
Germany.
Plus, they pay far less than
they should on
NATO and military.
This will change."
Today, Spicer insisted the
leaders' relationship
is unbelievable.
SEAN SPICER: They get along very
well.
He has a lot of respect for her.
They continued to grow the bond
they had during
their talks in the G7.
JOHN YANG: All this comes amid
rumblings of
a staff shakeup.
White House communications
director Michael
Dubke has quit after only three
months on
the job, and the White House may
set up a
rapid-response war room to deal
with the Russia
investigations.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will take
a closer look
at how all this affects work at
the White
House later in the program.
In the day's other news: The
U.S. military
announced that it knocked a mock
warhead out
of the sky in the first such
test in three
years.
It targeted a long-range missile
like the
one that North Korea is
developing.
An interceptor launched from
Southern California
hit the warhead that was
launched from more
than 4,000 miles away over the
Pacific Ocean.
South Korea's president charged
today that
the U.S. delivered more
anti-missile launchers
to his country without his
approval, and he
demanded an investigation.
Moon Jae-in took office this
month after his
predecessor was ousted in a
corruption scandal.
Moon wants to review the
decision to deploy
the THAAD anti-missile system.
Now a spokesman says he wasn't
told about
the new launchers arriving.
®MD-BO /YOON YOUNG-CHAN, South
Korean Presidential
Spokesman (through translator):
President
Moon was briefed on such facts,
and said it
was very shocking.
He ordered his senior secretary
for civil
affairs and the national
security council
chief to find the truth behind
the unauthorized
entry of the four rocket
launchers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Both China and
North Korea
strongly oppose South Korea
installing the
anti-missile system.
The death toll in Sri Lanka has
hit at least
194 in the wake of severe floods
and mudslides.
The disaster started last
Friday.
Today, Indian aid teams
off-loaded shiploads
of goods as rescue efforts
continued.
Water levels slowly receded as
the weather
cleared.
Almost 100 people are still
missing, and more
than 80,000 are still displaced
and remain
in relief camps.
Back in this country, the
Portland, Oregon,
man accused of fatally stabbing
two other
men appeared in court today.
Police say the victims
intervened as Jeremy
Christian was verbally abusing
two young Muslim
women.
The 35-year-old suspect
repeatedly shouted
to the courtroom during his
briefing hearing.
JEREMY CHRISTIAN, Defendant:
Death to the
enemies of America.
Leave this country if your hate
our freedoms.
You call it terrorism.
I call it patriotism.
You hear me?
Die.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The mayor of
Portland says
he hopes the killings will lead
to changes
in the nation's political
dialogue.
The city of Cleveland has fired
the police
officer who fatally shot a
12-year-old black
boy, Tamir Rice.
Officer Timothy Loehmann shot
Rice at a recreation
center in 2014.
It happened moments after
Loehmann and another
officer answered a call about
someone pointing
a gun.
It turned out Rice had a pellet
gun.
Cleveland's police chief says
that Loehmann
was fired for inaccurate details
on his job
application, and not for the
Rice shooting
itself.
CALVIN WILLIAMS, Cleveland,
Ohio, Police Chief:
There's a 12-year-old kid dead,
so, I mean,
you know, people on both sides
are going to
say it wasn't enough, it was too
much.
After, you know, over two years
of investigation
by our agency, the county
prosecutor's office
and the sheriff's department, I
think we have
come to a -- what we consider a
fair conclusion
to this process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Loehmann's
partner on the force
was suspended for 10 days for a
driving violation.
Meanwhile, five people are dead
and 44 wounded
in Chicago after a wave of
shootings over
the Memorial Day weekend.
The holiday has become one of
the deadliest
times of the year in the city.
This year's numbers are actually
lower than
last year, when seven people
were killed and
61 wounded.
Police in Florida now confirm
that golfing
great Tiger Woods had not been
drinking when
they arrested him early Monday.
A police report confirms Woods'
statement
that alcohol wasn't involved.
It does say the golfer was --
quote -- "asleep
at the wheel" and that his
speech was -- quote
-- "extremely slow and slurred."
Woods is still facing a charge
of driving
under the influence.
He blames a reaction to
medication.
On Wall Street, a seven-day
rally ended as
interest rates fell and pulled
down bank stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 50 points
to close at 21029.
The Nasdaq fell seven, and the
S&P 500 slipped
about three.
And former Panamanian dictator
Manuel Noriega
died in Panama City today.
He grabbed power in the early
1980s and initially
became a U.S. ally, but a U.S.
invasion ousted
him in 1989, and he served 17
years in a U.S.
federal prison for drug
trafficking and money
laundering.
He later served time in France
and back in
Panama as well.
Manuel Noriega was 83 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
one-on-one
with the former director of
national intelligence;
what effect are the Russia
investigations
and turmoil inside the White
House having
on the president's agenda?;
bombings rock
Baghdad at the start of Ramadan;
and much
on the president's agenda?;
bombings rock
Baghdad at the start of Ramadan;
and much
more.
And now to my interview with the
former director
of national intelligence, James
Clapper.
He served in that post for
six-and-a-half
years under President Obama,
stepping down
just this past January.
We spoke earlier today.
Former Director of National
Intelligence James
Clapper, thank you very much for
talking with
us.
JAMES CLAPPER, Former U.S.
National Intelligence
Director: Well, thanks for
having me, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me start with
the news
that was out this morning from
CNN, essentially,
that U.S. intelligence officials
last year
picked up from Russian sources
that Russian
government officials said they
had derogatory
information about then-candidate
Donald Trump
and people close to him, some of
his top aides.
Do you know anything about this?
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, I can't
comment on specific
reports, whether we have them or
not or the
content of them.
I will say, though, that, in
general, that
there was concern that all of us
had about
these interactions, whether we
had direct
reflections or indirect
reflections of them,
based on discussions among the
Russians themselves.
We didn't know the intent and we
didn't know
the content, but, in the context
of what else
the Russians were doing to
interfere with
our election and the long
history of what
the Russians do -- have done and
continue
to do to undermine us, undermine
our processes
and undermine our system, there
was great
concern about what was going on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about another
story that surfaced in the last
week, and
that has to do with the
president's son-in-law,
Jared Kushner.
Essentially, it was reported
that he was trying
to set up a secret back channel
to Russian
government officials in early
December, during
the transition last year.
Is there any rational
explanation, any explanation
you can think of for doing that?
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, I guess a
benign explanation
was simply an outreach to the
Russians, the
Russian government.
So that's not, in and of itself,
untoward.
But, again, not knowing the
intent or the
content, and whether or not the
sort of time-honored
principle of one president at a
time in this
country, that did give rise,
particularly
given the attempts to mask,
apparently, this
dialogue, so that was certainly
a concern
to all of us.
It certainly was to me
personally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Can you think of
a reason why
it would be necessary to have a
secret -- a
channel that was secret from
U.S. intelligence
agencies?
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, if it's
true -- and,
again, I'm not -- I can't
confirm or deny
-- but if it's true that the
objective here
was to use Russian secure
communications as
the mode of this dialogue or
this communication,
that is, I will say, curious.
Why all the cloak-and-dagger
secrecy?
If the intent was simply to
reach out to establish
-- to make acquaintance -- but
one wonders
if there was something worse
than that or
more nefarious than that.
And, again, we didn't know, I
certainly didn't
know before I left the
government on the 20th
of January.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm asking
because yesterday
-- or, over the weekend, the
secretary of
homeland security, John Kelly,
said in an
interview, he said, it's a good
thing.
He said, if there were attempts
to open lines
of communication, it's a good
thing.
It's a positive thing.
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, it could
be, and I agree
with him.
And, again, this is not a new
thing.
Other governments have sought
back channels,
and particularly as
administrations change
over.
But there is an art form here to
how this
is done, and there is a line
between reaching
out, establishing lines of
communication,
vs. substantively undermining
the policies
of the current administration.
And, again, we do have a
principle here of
one president at a time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask you
about two
recent disclosures of classified
information
by the president himself.
One was in a meeting with
Russian officials
in the Oval Office when the
president shared
information about ISIS
capabilities...
JAMES CLAPPER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... that had all
the earmarks
of coming from Israeli
intelligence, and then
separately in a conversation
with the president
of the Philippines, when the
president said
that two U.S. nuclear subs had
been in the
vicinity of North Korea.
Is this truly damaging
information to share,
or is all this overblown?
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, certainly,
I guess there
are two dimensions to this.
One, the public revelation of
this, which,
of course, was in both cases
somehow leaked
to the media, that -- and leaks,
I have to
say, are bad.
I know that's the lifeblood of
the media business,
but, for the intelligence
community, leaks
are bad.
They compromise sources and
methods, tradecraft,
in some cases, can endanger the
lives of assets.
So, leaks are damaging.
The other dimension, of course,
is the revelation
of these things to a foreign
government.
Well, that kind of thing goes on
all the time,
but it's also in due deference
to protecting
either the operational equities
or the intelligence
equities.
And it's not something you just
kind of wing
extemporaneously.
JUDY WOODRUFF: These incidents
must give some
in the intelligence community
pause.
JAMES CLAPPER: I'm sure it does.
And it's not exactly
confidence-building.
And I think that's important to
restore or
achieve a level of confidence
that that flow
can continue unabated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you hear
from your
friends in the intelligence
community about
their view of President Trump?
JAMES CLAPPER: I think the view
of the intelligence
community, as much as I
explained to him when
I spoke with him by phone on the
11th of January,
after he characterized the
intelligence community
as Nazis, that the national
is a national treasure, and that
the men of
the women of the community stand
ready to
support the president, whoever
it is, particularly
in his role as commander in
chief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The terrorist
threat.
Over the last few days, the
secretary of homeland
security, John Kelly, has
painted a pretty
frightening picture.
He said at one point he expects
-- quote -- "a
lot more attacks" like the one
in Manchester,
England.
And he said: "The terror threat
is worse than
most people realize.
If people knew what I knew, they
would never
leave the house in the morning."
Do you share...
JAMES CLAPPER: And he went on to
praise the
counterterrorism efforts that we
have under
way, of course, very much of
which the intelligence
community is involved in.
And we have gone to great
lengths and made
great investments to try to
ensure that we
don't have a similar instance as
happened
in Manchester.
But I would point out that this
may not necessarily
come from outside.
And the issues we have had in
this country
have been caused by U.S.
citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you share that
level of
alarm, though, that people
wouldn't leave
their houses if they knew...
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, I'm here,
so I left my
house this morning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: North Korea.
Do you believe there's a
realistic chance
now that North Korea could pull
back from
its nuclear weapons development
program?
JAMES CLAPPER: I think it's
unlikely, and
I certainly think it's not
realistic for us
to expect the North Koreans to
give up their
nuclear weapons.
That is their ticket to
survival.
I was taken aback when I visited
North Korea
in November 2014 to bring out
two of our citizens
who were in hard labor then.
And I have been a student of the
Korean Peninsula
for a long time, ever since I
served there
as the director of intelligence
for U.S. Forces
Korea in the mid-80s.
But I had underestimated the
level of paranoia
and the siege mentality that
prevails in Pyongyang.
And, as they look out outward,
all they see
are enemies.
And so they're not going to give
up their
nuclear weapons.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you're
going to be in
South Korea in coming days.
What do you think the best
approach is for
the United States?
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, I think
dialogue.
And I know we have had --
there's a long history
here of dialogue which hasn't
turned out so
well with the North Koreans.
I attempted it myself.
But I think that's a far better
option than
a military confrontation, which
I think would
be a disaster.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how much does
it matter
what the president says and
tweets?
JAMES CLAPPER: Well, it matters
a lot.
Words count.
And it's quite important what he
says or doesn't
say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One final
question about Robert
Mueller.
You know him well, named special
counsel to
oversee the Russia
investigation.
How confident are you that he's
going to be
able to get to the bottom of
what happened?
JAMES CLAPPER: I think that was
an inspired,
brilliant choice to pick Bob
Mueller for that
function.
In my opinion, he's cut from the
same cloth
as Jim Comey, two outstanding
public servants.
And Bob will get to the bottom
of this, and
he will not be intimidated by
any outside
influences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: James Clapper,
former director
of national intelligence, thank
you very much.
JAMES CLAPPER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return our
focus to the
White House, how the Trump
administration
is responding to mounting
tensions, and how
that compares to past
administrations, with
Gerald Seib, executive
Washington editor for
The Wall Street Journal.
And Christopher Ruddy, he's the
CEO of the
conservative Newsmax media and a
friend of
President Trump.
And welcome, both of you, to the
program.
Chris Ruddy, I'm going to start
with you.
You told The Wall Street Journal
for their
today's editions that right now
the White
House is in a what you call
perpetual quagmire
on side issues.
What did you mean by that?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY, CEO, Newsmax:
Well, the
side issues are things you have
been talking
about, Judy, and a lot of the
other media
on the Russia issue.
Sometimes, the president's
tweets cause some
of those side issues.
And they're not focusing on the
-- I think
the big agenda items of the
Trump administration
that are very positive for him,
such as his
jobs programs and efforts there,
the fact
that he is getting China to open
up its markets
for the first time in 30 years
to American
businesses, incredible movement
on making
the country more secure.
And those things are not being
talked about,
and they're focusing on
personnel issues and
other things that are not
necessarily moving
their agenda or making the
president more
popular.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jerry Seib, how
do you see
the state of affairs right now
in the White
House?
GERALD SEIB, The Wall Street
Journal: Well,
I think there is a danger at a
time like this
that the controversy, the
scandal, the investigation
swallows up to the rest of the
agenda.
And we saw this -- I think back
to the Reagan
White House in the second term,
the Iran-Contra
scandal.
You saw it, as well as I did.
And there was a real danger that
the whole
second term could be swallowed
up by that
scandal, and so the White House
moved.
It brought in new blood.
It brought in a new chief of
staff, a new
White House counsel, a new
national security
adviser.
And, importantly, it set up an
entire separate
channel to handle the
investigation, the scandal,
the controversy, trying to wall
off the rest
of the agenda, so it wouldn't
get consumed,
and so the rest of the White
House staff could
work on things other than the
scandal that
seemed to be everywhere.
It took a long while, and people
who worked
in that White House think they
lost almost
an entire year to the
controversy, but eventually
they figured out how to get some
other things
done.
I think that's in many ways the
challenge
before the Trump White House
right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chris Ruddy, you
talk to this
president on a regular...
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: Well...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, pick up on
that, because
I'm curious to know how the
president is seeing
this.
Does he feel he's able to turn
things around?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: Well, I
always say Donald
Trump moves in two parallel
tracks at the
same time.
There's the controversial
political guy that's
always out there with his
tweets.
He comes from a showbiz
background, as well
as a very successful career in
finance and
real estate.
He loves sometimes the
controversy more than
some people -- the press thinks
they're totally
aggravating him.
He sometimes thrives on the
public controversy
and the hitting back.
Meanwhile, he's very
results-oriented.
He knows that the American
people are going
to judge him by his performance
on the economy,
on jobs, on national security.
And on those things, Judy, he
has been pushing
forward relentlessly.
I spoke to Steve Bannon today.
And he said to me that they are
-- the morale
in the administration is very
high, that they're
pushing forward on all these
agenda items.
They're not going to get bogged
down on these
investigations.
And I think that's the important
thing.
And I think the president will
keep his eye
on the ball.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jerry Seib, if
that's the case,
is that coming across?
JERRY SEIB: Well, I don't think,
at the moment
it is.
And there's a tendency at a time
like this
in the White House to think,
well, the problem
is the press or the problem is
the leakers,
and if we could just have a
better communication
strategy and get our message
out, everything
will be OK.
And it's rarely that simple.
I think one of the realities
that I think
past presidents have discovered
at times like
this is, the one thing you can't
really do
is stonewall the investigative
process.
You have to sort of let it play
out.
And, in fact, clearing the air
is an important
thing in the long run.
In the short run, that's a very
tough thing
for any president to see.
But I do think, right now -- and
this is why
the next few weeks I think are
really crucial
-- the way you look forward out
of a rut like
that is to show some forward
momentum on your
agenda in Washington.
The problem right now is that,
on health care
and the budget and tax cuts,
that doesn't
look like it's going to be an
easy thing to
do.
You need to put some wins on the
board.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chris Ruddy, is
that feasible?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: Well, let's
start with
one other -- well, Gerald says
stonewalling
the investigative process.
Where has the president
stonewalled the investigative
process?
They're cooperating with
Congress.
He's never said for Congress --
he's got majorities
in the House and Senate.
Never encouraged anybody to shut
down investigation,
never -- even with the firing of
Comey, he
could have -- the way you shut
down that investigation
was in the Justice Department.
He knew that.
He could have tried to shut down
that investigation.
There was never -- he was upset
that Comey
was pursuing this, when people
are making
leaks of the most highly
classified conversations
our president can have with
foreign leaders,
and they're making them out of
the intelligence
community, and nobody wants to
investigate
that.
And yet he feels, after six
months of investigating
Russia, they keep saying there's
no evidence
of collusion on this, but yet it
keeps going
on and on.
So, I don't think he -- there is
any evidence
that he's been trying to shut
down these investigations.
But, at the same time, I think
he's frustrated
that the media keeps focusing on
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But is it
realistic, Jerry
Seib -- and I will come back to
you, Chris
Ruddy, on this -- to expect that
the media
is just going to stand down
while these investigations
take place?
GERALD SEIB: Well, first, I
wasn't saying
that there had been
stonewalling.
I'm saying that's the temptation
at a time
like this.
And I think past presidents have
learned you
have to avoid that temptation.
So, I agree with Chris entirely
on that.
I think it's not realistic to
think that the
press is going to stand down.
And this is going to be with us
for a while.
So I think the way you approach
this is, you
accept that there's going to be
this distraction,
but you can't make it -- allow
it to become
an all-consuming distraction.
And so you almost need a
two-track strategy.
And that's really the point I
was trying to
make.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chris Ruddy, is
there -- are
there more staff...
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: Well...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: No, you go
ahead, Judy.
I keep interrupting you.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're...
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: This is my
first time on
your show, so I'm learning your
tempo a little
bit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I'm curious
to know,
are there going to be, you
expect, more staff
changes?
We saw the communications
director leave today,
or expected the leave after
today.
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: I think there
will be.
I don't think it's going to be
wholesale.
Like, sometimes, the press says,
President
Trump is going the make this
wild, major shakeup.
I don't -- I think there will be
changes.
Again, let's go back to certain
core facts
here.
This is a man that was never a
politician,
never in Washington.
He brought in some fresh faces.
He thought it was going to open
up government.
He realizes he needs more
veteran, experienced
hands.
He's on a learning curve, I
think a pretty
fast one.
He's brought in some very good
people in the
Cabinet.
He's deferring to them on most
of the major
stuff, which is good.
And he's brought in McMaster,
who is excellent.
And he's bringing in other
people.
And I think you see these
changes over time.
I think it will be very healthy
for him.
I think it's going to be good
for the country
as a whole.
But I do think there will be
additional changes
coming down the pike.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, very quickly,
if that's
what they do, Jerry Seib, can
that make a
difference?
GERALD SEIB: I think it can,
absolutely.
And I think one of the things
you have to
remember is that Republicans on
the Hill who
control the House and the
Senate, they're
the ones who kind of have to
take the next
step at pushing the agenda
forward.
That's not all on Donald Trump.
That's on Republican leadership
in the House
and the Senate as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We are going to
have to leave
it there.
Gentlemen, we look forward to
having you back
to discuss this and much more to
follow.
Jerry Seib, Chris Ruddy, thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
some simple
changes could be revolutionizing
care for
premature babies; a view from
Arkansas -- the
state's governor on the
Republican health
care plan; and a poet laureate
helping Chicago
students realize the power of
words.
But first: Twin bombings rocked
Baghdad early
this morning, just days after
the beginning
of the Muslim holy month of
Ramadan.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: The first attack
hit a popular
ice cream parlor in the Karrada
district of
the capital just after midnight.
A suicide bomber struck as
families milled
about following their breaking
of the fast.
At least 15 people were killed,
and nearly
twice as many were wounded.
ISIS has claimed responsibility.
The second attack came during
the morning
rush hour in a central district
of Baghdad.
A car bomb there killed at least
14 and wounded
more than 30, all this as Iraqi
forces, backed
by U.S. and coalition
airstrikes, press the
offensive on Mosul, the last
major ISIS foothold
in Iraq.
We turn to Susannah George of
the Associated
Press in Baghdad.
Susannah, thank you for joining
us.
So, these attacks are clearly
targeting places
where many are gathered, right?
What can you tell us about the
bombings?
SUSANNAH GEORGE, Associated
Press: In the
aftermath of the bombings, there
was a lot
of anger.
Some of that anger was to the
militants that
carried out the bombings, that
deliberately
targeted targets where there
were children
and families.
But there was a lot of anger at
Iraq's political
leadership, who many Iraqis hold
responsible
for the security failings that
allowed these
bombs to get into Central
Baghdad.
This is not the first time that
we have seen
these large-scale bombings
during Ramadan.
Last year, a large truck bombing
in the same
neighborhood in Karrada killed
hundreds of
people.
That was the largest single
attack in Baghdad
since the 2003 overthrow of
Saddam Hussein.
And, afterwards, Iraqi security
officials
pledged to revamp the security
of the district
of Baghdad.
They increased checkpoints.
They increased security checks.
But the attacks have continued.
JEFFREY BROWN: So is there a
fear or a sense
even that this is the beginning
of a new terror
campaign, the beginning of
Ramadan season,
and what is the level of
security in Baghdad?
SUSANNAH GEORGE: Well, this is
just the first
few days of the holy month of
Ramadan that
often sees an uptick of violence
here in Iraq.
And civilians and Iraqi security
officials
are warning of more attacks to
come.
They say this is partially
because of the
holy month of Ramadan, but also
because I.S.
fighters are losing ground in
Mosul in the
north of Iraq, and we often see
this increase
in insurgent activity in
Baghdad, other places
far from the front lines as the
extremists
lose territory on the
battlefield.
JEFFREY BROWN: You mentioned
Mosul and ISIS
losing ground, yes, but the
fight does continue
there very much.
Give us -- very briefly, where
do things stand?
SUSANNAH GEORGE: I.S. only holds
a small pocket
of neighborhoods in Western
Mosul, mainly
the Old City and a few other
neighborhoods
around that area.
Iraqi forces are advancing, but
the advance
is incredibly slow.
This is some of the most densely
populated
neighborhoods in Mosul.
The U.N. estimates that more
than 100,000
civilians are trapped in this
part of Mosul,
and the Iraqi military has asked
these people
to flee in an effort to speed up
the military
operations in that district.
But aid groups are warning that
that could
be incredibly dangerous for the
civilians
who are trapped inside the Old
City, as there
are no safe passageways for them
to exit.
So it would mean that thousands
of civilians
would be crossing front lines
and could get
caught up in some of the deadly
clashes between
I.S. fighters and the Iraqi
security forces.
JEFFREY BROWN: Susannah, you
alluded to this
earlier, but these new bombings
in Baghdad
raise the question about whether
this is because
ISIS is stronger or weaker in
taking an action
like this.
What do you see, and what are
people telling
you?
SUSANNAH GEORGE: Well, Iraqi
officials and
coalition officials will say
that these bombings
in Baghdad, at the same time
that I.S. is
losing ground on the front lines
in places
like Mosul, are an effort to
distract from
those territorial defeats, that
it's actually
a sign of weakness.
But the fact that the group is
still able
to plan and carry out these
rather complex
attacks inside a very secure
part of the Iraqi
capital shows that the group
maintains significant
insurgent capabilities, despite
the fact that
they have lost significant
territory.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Susannah George
of the AP in Baghdad, thank you
very much.
SUSANNAH GEORGE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the great
medical advances
in recent years is the treatment
and care
of premature babies.
Despite that, these tiny infants
born before
full term are still at higher
risk for a range
of problems down the road.
Correspondent William Brangham
and producer
Jason Kane bring us the first of
two stories
about a study under way that's
testing whether
the simplest human interactions
can make a
big difference in these
children's lives.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Most moms
don't have to
travel 25 miles every morning to
see their
newborn baby.
But for Kate Ilie, there's an
hour-long commute,
frantic calls...
KATE ILIE, Mother: I would
rather just meet
in the unit, if we're allowed
to.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: ... Manhattan
gridlock,
all to do the one thing she most
desperately
wants, be with her baby girl,
Caroline (ph).
WOMAN: All right, Caroline, so
we are going
to reconnect with mommy now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But, as you
can see, Caroline
had a rough path into the world.
Born 13 weeks too soon, she's
had to live
here in Morgan Stanley
Children's hospital,
for months.
WOMAN: OK, now we're going to go
skin-to-skin.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Kate and baby
Caroline are
part of an ongoing research
effort out of
Columbia University Medical
Center and New
York Presbyterian examining
whether the most
basic nurturing techniques, like
this quiet
moment, can help heal the
traumas of premature
birth.
WOMAN: The more you do this, the
more you
reinforce that connection.
KATE ILIE: It took us a little
while, but
we're doing it now.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH, Columbia
University: You are
calming me, and I am calming
you, and then
the two crave being together,
and it's self-perpetuating.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This
intervention is the
brainchild of Dr. Martha Welch.
She says that, while much of
this seems like
the standard care offered to
premature babies
and their parents, here, the
focus is 100
percent on strengthening the
emotional connection
between mother and child.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: It's not cerebral.
It's visceral.
It's gut feelings.
And they're beginning to set
this pattern
of calming each other.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It seems so
basic.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: Very basic.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the last
few months,
we have been following several
moms and their
premature babies through this
process.
Neonatal intensive care units
give these children
a better shot at survival now
than at any
other time in history.
In the early '90s, a child born
as early as
23 or 24 weeks was unlikely to
survive.
Now they routinely do.
But, despite that, leaving the
womb so early
still puts these kids at high
risk for emotional,
behavioral and developmental
challenges.
This intervention is meant to
help minimize
those impacts.
MAN: You make momma feel more
comfortable
now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Nurse Mary
McKiernan says
step one is often connecting
with a child
that's literally wrapped in
lifesaving technology.
They call these calming
Sessions.
MARY MCKIERNAN, Nurse: There's
so much medical
equipment, and monitors, and
beeping, and
some mothers, they're afraid.
They're afraid to speak to their
babies.
KATE ILIE: I'm trying to figure
out how to
hold Caroline.
She has her CPAP on.
She has her tube in.
This woman comes up to me, and
she says: "My
name is Mary, and I'm a nurse
here.
Do you want me to help you hold
your baby?"
And I could cry just telling
this.
So I was like, I will take
anything.
MARY MCKIERNAN: I know she's
sleeping, but
she can -- she knows your voice,
so talk to
her in your emotional tone, as
you always
do.
KATE ILIE: You have had a long
morning.
You finished your whole bottle
MARY MCKIERNAN: It feels good,
right?
KATE ILIE: There's nothing
better.
MARY MCKIERNAN: Yes.
KATE ILIE: It's like therapy for
both of us.
I'm telling you, that was the
first time I
felt like I could breathe, and I
could bond
with my baby.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the first
time?
KATE ILIE: Yes.
And it was so emotional.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Welch and
McKiernan say
this is a step beyond what's
known as kangaroo
care, the skin-to-skin contact
that's been
taught in many NICUs since the
1990s.
MARY MCKIERNAN: I have been a
nurse here many
years, but there was something
missing.
And what was missing was that
helping the
mother to get to that emotional
connection.
ELIA CARDENAS, Mother: Take care
of them for
me, St. Jude.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Getting past
her fear of
losing her babies has been one
of the biggest
obstacles for Elia Cardenas.
ELIA CARDENAS: Please help the
nurses give
them all the care that they
need, so I can
bring them home.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Her twin boys,
Lukas (ph)
and Tadeo (ph), were born at 26
weeks, three-and-a-half
months too soon.
Her previous child had also been
born prematurely,
but he only lived a few hours,
and she's terrified
the twins won't survive either.
ELIA CARDENAS: On my way home, I
was crying
the entire way.
I wasn't planning on having them
so early.
And then, when I got home, it
was even worse,
because, you know, I had all
these things
for the babies ready.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Each day,
Cardenas makes
the hour-long trip to the
hospital from her
home in Port Chester, New York.
But she's put up her own
barriers.
ELIA CARDENAS: It made me feel
helpless.
It made me feel -- I didn't feel
like a mom
seeing them there.
I didn't feel like they were my
babies because
they were in the hospital, and I
didn't know
if they were going to make it or
not.
And I really didn't want to get
close with
them.
I didn't want to -- I don't
know.
It's hard to describe that
feeling.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Like everyone
who was part
of this intervention, Cardenas
was also encouraged
to talk with the boys, and
taught how to hold
them inside the incubators.
Dr. Welch will even put her
hands on Cardenas'
back and on her arm to mimic the
touch and
pressure she can use on the
boys.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: I was trying to
elicit emotion
from Elia.
I was holding her back, so that
she would
feel the kind of comfort that I
wanted her
to convey to her baby.
This is not a didactic session.
It's experiential.
She has to experience me and she
has to experience
what she's doing to the baby.
ELIA CARDENAS: I'm trying to be
here for them.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: And you have been.
ELIA CARDENAS: Yes.
And I'm always scared.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: Yes, and even
though things
are really good now, that
feeling doesn't
exactly go away.
ELIA CARDENAS: No, it doesn't.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: It will.
It will go away.
Once the baby calms the mother,
and the mother
feels that, she begins to
believe in the baby's
survival capacity, because, if
this baby can
make her feel like that, the
baby's viable.
MIGUELINA TAVAREZ, Mother: We
had eggs.
After dinner, I told my dad a
ghost story.
Boy, did he get scared.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Another mother
in the study,
Miguelina Tavarez, says she
can't really explain
why, but these simple
interventions have had
a powerful effect or her ability
to connect
with her daughter Reylan (ph).
MIGUELINA TAVAREZ: I actually
come in now,
and I can take a deep breath and
be like,
I'm all right.
And she's all right.
And then, in the long run, I
will be like,
you know what, me and you have a
trust besides
a mother and a daughter bond,
that I can express
myself to you, and you will
appreciate it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today, she's
learning another
part of the intervention: using
what's known
as a scent cloth.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: We have a little
flannel square
that the mother wears in her
bra, which she
then gives to the baby.
And we put the same kind of
cloth under the
baby's head, and give that to
the mother.
MIGUELINA TAVAREZ: I felt like
my whole body
was relaxed.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: How do you feel
now when you
smell it?
MIGUELINA TAVAREZ: The same way.
It's like...
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: Let all the stress
drain out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But do these
interventions
really make any tangible
difference?
Tomorrow, we will examine some
of the surprising
results, and we will look at
questions over
some of Dr. Welch's past
practices.
For the "PBS NewsHour," in New
York, I'm William
Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
another health
care story, this one the ongoing
political
battle to replace Obamacare.
The U.S. Senate is beginning to
write its
own reform bill, and discovering
there are
some big differences of opinion
over what
Republicans passed in the House.
Earlier this month, we spoke
with Democratic
Governor John Hickenlooper of
Colorado about
efforts to replace the
Affordable Care Act.
Today, we hear from a
Republican.
And our Lisa Desjardins has
that.
LISA DESJARDINS: As part of our
ongoing look
at what's at stake in health
care for those
closest to the problem, we're
now joined by
Asa Hutchinson, the Republican
governor from
Arkansas.
Our viewers will recall that
Arkansas was,
of course, one of the states to
expand Medicaid
under Obamacare.
Governor Hutchinson, thank you
for joining
us.
Now, you're in an interesting
position.
You have opposed the Affordable
Care Act,
but also you and your
predecessor, as we just
said, supported the expansion.
And because of those things, we
have seen
uninsurance rates in your state
get slashed
in half under the Affordable
Care Act.
What do you think of the
Affordable Care Act
right now?
Does it need full repeal?
GOV.
ASA HUTCHINSON (R), Arkansas:
Well, we need
to change what we have.
It doesn't work completely.
For example, we wanted to reform
the Medicaid
expansion in Arkansas with a
simple work requirement,
just lick we have on the SNAP
program, but
under Obamacare, the previous
administration
wouldn't give us that
requirement.
We needed to control the cost
more.
We're unable to do that whenever
it's mandatory
that you cover everybody up to
138 percent
of the federal poverty level.
And so we're trying to
concentrate limited
resources in Arkansas.
We don't have the flexibility we
need under
the current program.
So, yes, I supported a change in
it, and I
applaud the House for starting
the debate
with passing a repeal and a
replacement.
But we need to obviously do
more, and I'm
looking for the Senate to --
they're starting
over.
They're drafting it.
I hope they listen to the
governors to provide
the flexibility that's needed,
and I hope
they take some ideas from
Arkansas as to some
of the good things we have done
in terms of
reform, controlling costs, but
also expanding
health care coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: One of the
items of flexibility
that House Republicans would
give you is the
ability to waive out of some
things like essential
benefits or a cap on the costs
for people
who have preexisting conditions.
Are those things that you would
want to waive
out of?
GOV.
ASA HUTCHINSON: Not necessarily,
but we have
got to be able to have the
flexibility and
options for the state.
And, for example, on the health
care benefits,
I think the state should be able
to give more
flexibility in terms of
coverage.
Not everybody wants every
essential health
benefit.
They might want to have
different options
and a menu of options that suit
their particular
needs.
Let's give the states the option
to enhance
coverage, to make sure there's
health care
options that are out there, but
also the ability
to control costs.
And so we want to look at a menu
of options.
We take two options right now in
terms of
reform.
We want to be able to reduce it
from 138 percent
of the federal poverty level
down to the poverty
level, so we can concentrate our
limited resources
on those that need it the most,
shift more
to the exchange, where they will
have support
and coverage, but it will be a
cost-saving
measure, both for the state and
the federal
government.
These are types of reforms and
flexibility
that will make sense.
The work requirement is
important to encourage
people to have the training they
need to move
up the employment ladder, to
make more money,
but, at the same time, have some
support for
health care.
These are the reforms we want to
put into
place.
LISA DESJARDINS: Governor, House
Republicans
would offer you more
flexibility, as you say,
but they would also cut some of
the Medicaid
funding you get from the
government, and it
seems they are increasing
uncertainty.
Insurers need to set their rates
for the next
year, and they aren't sure if
they are going
to get the subsidies that the
president and
Congress control.
What does that uncertainty feel
like, and
are you worried about funding
cuts?
GOV.
ASA HUTCHINSON: Yes, that's one
of the big
faults of the House bill is that
it's a cost
shift to the states.
We have to absorb more of the
cost to maintain
the same level of coverage.
We don't need that cost shift to
the states.
We need to continue a good
federal-state partnership.
So, I'm looking to the Senate to
rewrite that
portion of it, so the
flexibility is good,
but you cannot accompany that
with a massive
cost shift to the states that
would leave
more and more uninsured, because
the states
cannot absorb that kind of a
burden.
But the flexibility is an
important part of
it to be able to manage it.
Two points.
Under Obamacare, they
underestimated the number
that was going to go on
Medicaid.
Too many went on Medicaid.
They overestimated those that
would go on
the exchange, and there are too
few on the
exchange.
We want to reverse that.
And under Arkansas' plan, you're
going to
restrict those that are on the
Medicaid portion
of it, shift more to the
exchange, and that's
the original design that makes
it more cost-effective
for the states.
LISA DESJARDINS: I see.
Governor Asa Hutchinson,
Republican of Arkansas,
thank you so much for joining
us.
GOV.
ASA HUTCHINSON: Great to be with
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a distinct
way of giving students their own
voice.
Earlier, we reported on another
violent holiday
weekend in Chicago.
More than 50 people were shot
over four days.
Last year, more than 4,000 were
shot in the
city.
Often, when we talk about the
school system
in Chicago, we hear about too
much violence
and too little money.
Tonight, we look at a project
led by the nation's
poet laureate to give kids a way
of creating
meaningful expression about
their lives and
challenges they face.
Jeffrey Brown is back with this
report.
It's part of our weekly series
Making the
Grade.
JEFFREY BROWN: The reality of
one ninth grade
girl's life told in the language
of poetry,
by Nakia Sales.
NAKIA SALES, Student: Black kid,
black kid,
you have been shot.
Black kid, black kid, why you
have to die?
Never got to see you walk across
the stage
in a suit and tie.
Now your momma crying over your
casket, asking
God why.
JEFFREY BROWN: Earlier, at her
West Side Chicago
school, she'd told me how she
came to write
her poem.
NAKIA SALES: When we came back
from Christmas
break, I had just lost two of my
friends.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lost them to
violence?
NAKIA SALES: Yes.
They was walking down the street
one day,
and a car had rolled past, and
they had got
shot, both of them, in the head.
And then, when I got back to
school that day,
when I got to writing, "Black
Kid" automatically
came to my mind.
JEFFREY BROWN: This ceremony at
the Harold
Washington Public Library was
the culmination
of a year-long pilot program to
bring poetry
into the curriculum of about 40
inner-city
Chicago high schools and a
chance for students
to read their work for Juan
Felipe Herrera,
the outgoing U.S. poet laureate.
This past year, Herrera ran four
workshops
for ninth grade English
teachers, offering
ideas and prompts to encourage
writing.
He urged them to choose their
own reading
texts as examples,anything they
thought their
students might relate to.
Across the city, more than 85
percent of students
in Chicago public schools are
children of
color, and most are classified
as economically
disadvantaged.
MISSY HUGHES, Teacher, Michele
Clark Magnet
High School: I'm really
intentional about
finding poems that speak to
their experience.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nakia's teacher,
Missy Hughes
of Michele Clark High School,
was one of the
instructors who signed up for
the program.
MISSY HUGHES: We just saw how
students were
able to tell their story,
because there's
like -- there's this mainstream
narrative
out there about who they are and
what their
lives are, and that's -- it
doesn't honor
the complexity or the nuances or
really their
own voice.
JEFFREY BROWN: Herrera also
pushed the teachers
to find their own voice through
poetry, and
to read the results out loud.
MISSY HUGHES: It's intimidating.
It's the poet laureate of the
United States.
It keeps me honest to do it.
It's really hard to do that, to
go up there
and write something intimate,
most likely
about your life and your
experience, and then
to share that work with
everyone.
JEFFREY BROWN: It worked for the
teachers,
and for students like Nakia, who
says poetry
has already had a huge impact on
her young
life.
NAKIA SALES: It's a way to get
anger out too,
stress.
Anything that you got on your
mind, just let
it out on a piece of paper.
JEFFREY BROWN: But just how do
you reach young
people who don't have experience
with poetry?
JUAN FELIPE HERRERA, U.S. Poet
Laureate: It
may not be in their background,
maybe, in
terms of books, having books at
home.
But they have a lot of stories.
So, the poetry is there, but
it's there rumbling
in the heart and in the blood
and what they
see, you know, what they see day
to day.
And we want to bring all that
out.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Herrera, the
nation's first
Mexico-American poet laureate,
the project
is deeply personal.
When we first met two years ago,
he told me
of growing up in California, the
son of migrant
workers from Mexico.
He spoke only Spanish at first,
an experience
that left him feeling like an
outsider.
JUAN FELIPE HERRERA: And it
created a lot
of combustion in me, because I
wanted to be
inside society, I wanted to
communicate, I
wanted to have conversations.
I got to the point where I just
had to explode.
JEFFREY BROWN: Herrera credits
words and poetry
with unlocking his ability to
communicate
with the larger world.
JUAN FELIPE HERRERA: That's the
place I found
peace, the place I found
freedom, the place
I found my voice, and the place
where I could
construct things.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's the hope
for these students
as well.
Lynette Mendoza is a teacher at
the Marine
Leadership Academy, a public
school where
students prepare for military
service and
wear uniforms.
When the laureate visited the
school, Mendoza
says, it had a strong impact on
her students,
more than 90 percent of whom are
Latino.
LYNETTE MENDOZA, Marine
Leadership Academy:
They have a male military
instructor, and
some of them come from homes
where it's male-dominated.
It was really important for the
kids to see
a man could read poetry, write
poetry, and
be inspired and still be a man.
JEFFREY BROWN: That was
important, that he
was a man?
LYNETTE MENDOZA: I felt it was
real important.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you're making
-- make the
connection from what they learn
from poetry,
to a science class, or a math
class, or a
government class.
LYNETTE MENDOZA: You're looking
at the formulas
in math or in science, that's
the power.
And if you know how to work it,
you know how
to make certain adjustments, you
can come
up with something
earth-shattering.
And the same thing happens with
words.
JEFFREY BROWN: The district
partnered with
the Library of Congress, which
selects the
poet laureate, and the
Chicago-based Poetry
Foundation, which, for the
record, also supports
the "NewsHour."
This remains a small program,
and costs have
been minimal.
The school system provides subs
to fill in
when teachers have their
workshop days with
Herrera.
LaTanya McDade heads the Office
of Teaching
and Learning.
And while she admits the
district, the third
largest in the nation, faces
enormous challenges,
getting buy-in for a poetry
program wasn't
one of them.
LATANYA MCDADE, Office of
Teaching and Learning:
If you look over time at schools
that have
strong arts programs, you see
higher performance
in students overall.
So when you show that kind of
data, you're
seeing a higher percentage of
students really
showing strong academic
performance where
there is high arts investments.
JEFFREY BROWN: The next step,
McDade says,
is to measure the impact of the
poetry classes.
The district has signed on for
another year
and will track the effectiveness
of the program
for both teachers and their
students.
JUAN FELIPE HERRERA: Dinky
planet on a skateboard
of dynamite, oh, what to do?
JEFFREY BROWN: As for Juan
Felipe Herrera,
his term as U.S. poet laureate
is ending,
but he's committed to continue
working in
Chicago's schools.
He says poetry's place in the
education of
young people is needed more than
ever.
JUAN FELIPE HERRERA: We have got
to let our
students' lives, all their
lives, not just
part of their lives, express
itself in as
many ways as possible.
And where else are they going to
get that
openness and freedom?
In what other area in school?
Maybe there's other areas, but,
for sure,
poetry.
JEFFREY BROWN: Herrera and
others involved
hope this project can be a model
for other
cities around the nation.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown
in Chicago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: In a deeply conservative
West Virginia
town, dubbed the most Trumpian
place in America
by its mayor, there's a new
movement of women
who are coming together to
protest the president,
even if family and neighbors
don't like what
they have to say.
We take a close look at that
community on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.